# General documentation

## Heaps/Aux Heaps and Fat Pointers.
Heap is a bounded memory region to store data between near calls, and to communicate data between contracts.

Accessing an address beyond the heap bound leads to heap growth: the bound is adjusted to accommodate this address. The difference between old and new bounds is paid in gas.

Most instructions can not use heap directly. Instructions `ld.1` and `st.1` are used to load and store data on heap:

```asm
; take a 32-bit number from r1, use it as an offset in heap,
; load the word from heap by this offset to r4
ld.1 r1, r4

; take a 32-bit number from r3, use it as an offset in heap,
; store the word from r5 to heap by this offset
st.1 r3, r5
```

Heap is byte-addressable, but reads and writes operate in words. To read two consecutive words in heap starting at an address A, first, read from A, and then read from A+32. Reading any addresses in between is valid too.

One of the modifiers allows to immediately form a new offset like that:

```asm
; same as ld, but additionally r5 <- r1 + 32
ld.1.inc r1, r4, r5
```

This allows reading several consecutive words in a row:

```asm
; reads four consecutive words from heap starting at address in r8
; into registers r1, r2, r3, r4
ld.1.inc r8, r1, r8
ld.1.inc r8, r2, r8
ld.1.inc r8, r3, r8
ld.1.inc r8, r4, r8
```

In zkEVM, there are two heaps; every far call allocates memory for both of them.

Heaps are selected with modifiers `.1` or `.2` :

`ld.1` reads from heap;
`ld.2` reads from auxheap.
The reason why we need two heaps is technical. Heap contains calldata and returndata for calls to user contracts, while auxheap contains calldata and returndata for calls to system contracts. This ensures better compatibility with EVM as users should be able to call zkEVM-specific system contracts without them affecting calldata or returndata.

All heaps are stored in a vector and accessed via heap page IDs. When the program is loaded, three heaps are created: the primary heap with page ID 2, the auxheap with page ID 3, and a special calldata heap with page ID 1. Each time a far call is executed, new primary heap and auxheap are created. For calls to normal contracts, the calldata heap references the caller's primary heap. For calls to a system contract, the calldata heap references the caller's auxheap.

Apart from using opcodes `ld.1` and `ld.2`, heaps can also be accessed through the `FatPointerRead` operation, which is aliased as `ld`.

What is a `FatPointer`?

A Fat Pointer is a 4-tuple `(page,start,length,offset)` where the page indicates which heap it points to.

The `ld` opcode receives a Fat Pointer as input, and loads a 32 byte word of the correspondent heap starting at `start + offset`. If the length is smaller than 32 bytes, it fills the rest with 0s.

The `start` and `offset` fields seem like the same thing, but they differentiate when applying the concept of pointer narrowing.

Narrowing a pointer does the following:
```
new_start = start + offset
new_length = length - offset
new_offset = 0
```

When a far call is performed, the calldata heap is selected via a fat pointer, that we later store on register r1 for the new context to access.

There is no way of modifying heaps via Fat Pointers, they can only be used to read them.

## Far Calls vs Near Calls. CallFrames and Context

Explain the difference between the two, what information `CallFrame`s and `Context`s hold. Why `zksolc` wraps every far call in a near call to return the `success` boolean (with example assembly).

How far calls pass calldata and returndata between contracts through pointers. Explain the `get_memory_forward_pointer` function and its variants.

## Call Types

Regular, Mimic, and Delegate. Explain the differences between them and how MimicCalls are used to call constructors on behalf of the deployed contract.

## Precompiles and System calls

Explain how calls to precompiles work, use keccak as an example as it's used on every deployment (it goes to the `keccak.yul` contract which then uses the `precompile` opcode).
What are system contracts? What's a system call? Show some examples (deployer, nonce holder, L2BaseToken) and what they're used for.

## `context.get_context_u128` opcode, msg.value, payable functions

Explain what `msg.value` is in solidity, how that maps to `context.get_context_u128` and a small example showing how non-payable functions revert when `context.get_context_u128` is not set to zero on calls.

Show an example of the assembly generated by a function doing a `call` sending money and how it ends up calling the `MsgValueSimulator` (address `0x8009`, `32777` in decimal) which in turn calls the `L2BaseToken` contract. Something like this:

```
function sendMoney(address payable to) public payable {
  (bool success, bytes memory _data) = to.call{value: msg.value}("");
  require(success, "Failed to send Ether");
}
```

## Tracers and how to add prints

A `Tracer` should comply with the following trait
```
pub trait Tracer {
    fn before_execution(&mut self, _opcode: &Opcode, _vm: &mut VMState) -> Result<(), EraVmError>;
}
```

The `before_execution` function will be called on every loop just before the opcode execution.
Right now that is the only function the trait has, in the future more may be added as needed, like `before_decoding`, `after_decoding` or `after_execution`

An important Tracer is what we call the `PrintTracer`, with it we can print stuff on solidity contracts.

Here is an example of a contract with prints
```
pragma solidity >=0.4.16;

contract WithPrints {

    // This is for strings	
    function printIt(bytes32 toPrint) public {
        assembly {
            function $llvm_NoInline_llvm$_printString(__value) {
                let DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET := mul(32, 32)
                    mstore(add(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x20), 0x00debdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdf)
                    mstore(add(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x40), __value)
                    mstore(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x4A15830341869CAA1E99840C97043A1EA15D2444DA366EFFF5C43B4BEF299681)
        }
            $llvm_NoInline_llvm$_printString(toPrint)
        }
    }
    // This is for numbers
   function printItNum(uint256 toPrint) public {
        assembly {
            function $llvm_NoInline_llvm$_printString(__value) {
                let DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET := mul(32, 32)
                    mstore(add(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x20), 0x00debdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebdebde)
                    mstore(add(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x40), __value)
                    mstore(DEBUG_SLOT_OFFSET, 0x4A15830341869CAA1E99840C97043A1EA15D2444DA366EFFF5C43B4BEF299681)
        }
            $llvm_NoInline_llvm$_printString(toPrint)
        }
    }

    function aFunction() public returns(uint64) {
        uint64 result = 42;
        printIt("RESULT");
        printItNum(result);
        return result;
    }
}
```

There are two types of prints, strings and numbers, for that we have printIt and printItNum respectively.
What these functions are doing is, they use a debug slot defined as 1024, on `debug_slot + 32` we store a value that indicates if the print is going to be a string or a number, then on `debug_slot + 64` we store the value itself, and on `debug_slot` we store a magic value.

Here is where the PrintTracer does its magic, before every execution it looks if the opcode executed is a `HeapWrite`, this is the opcode responsible for storing things in the Heap, which is in the end what we are doing with the `mstore`, if the value being written is the magic value and its being written on the debug slot, then we know we are in one of the print functions and we need to print the value.

So we get from the heap the values on `debug_slot + 32` and `debug_slot + 64`, with the first one we check if we have to print a string or a number, and we print the correspondent one.

Have in mind that currently, mainly because of compiler optimizations, some prints may not appear, specially if they are right after each other.

In order to perform prints, at the moment we need to change the following on `src/lib.rs`

```
fn run_opcodes(vm: VMState, storage: &mut dyn Storage) -> (ExecutionOutput, VMState) {
    run(vm.clone(), storage, &mut []).unwrap_or((ExecutionOutput::Panic, vm))
}
```

For

```
use tracers::print_tracer::PrintTracer;

...

fn run_opcodes(vm: VMState, storage: &mut dyn Storage) -> (ExecutionOutput, VMState) {
    let mut tracer = PrintTracer {};
    run(vm.clone(), storage, &mut [Box::new(&mut tracer)]).unwrap_or((ExecutionOutput::Panic, vm))
}
```
## Difference between a revert and a panic; exception handlers

There are three ways to end execution: `Ok`, `Revert`, and `Panic`.

- `Ok` indicates that the current call ended correctly.
- `Revert` and `Panic` both signal that the call did not end correctly.

### Differences Between `Revert` and `Panic`

- **Gas Refund:** `Revert` returns unspent gas to the caller, while `Panic` does not.
- **Return Value:** `Revert` can include a return value, whereas `Panic` cannot.
- **Flags:** `Panic` sets the overflow (OF) flag.

### Execution Methods

- **Panic:** Executed via the `ret.panic` opcode.
- **Revert:** Can be executed via the `ret.revert` opcode, an error within the VM, or running out of gas.

### Instruction Flow

- **Ok:** After an `Ok` execution, the next instruction is the one immediately following the call.
- **Revert and Panic:** The next instruction is determined by the exception handler, defined in the near or far call, and stored in the corresponding `CallFrame`.


For example in the following code

```asm
__entry:
add 5,r0,r1
near_call r0,@call,@exception
add 6,r0,r1

__call:
add 7,r0,r1
ret.ok

__exception:
add 8,r0,r1
```

The following instructions will be executed

```asm
add 5,r0,r1
near_call r0,@call,@exception
    add 7,r0,r1
    ret.ok
add 6,r0,r1
```

But if it were like this

```
__entry:
add 5,r0,r1
near_call r0,@call,@exception
add 6,r0,r1

__call:
add 7,r0,r1
ret.revert

__exception:
add 8,r0,r1

```

It would execute

```asm
add 5,r0,r1
near_call r0,@call,@exception
    add 7,r0,r1
    ret.revert
add 8,r0,r1

```

## Bootloader

TODO
Operator execution (transactions come in, get executed on the bootloader, state is suspended until new transaction shows up).
